README.md, before:

# 🚀 TimeGPT Advanced Forecasting Analysis

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8%2B-blue)](https://www.python.org/)
[![TimeGPT](https://img.shields.io/badge/TimeGPT-Nixtla-green)](https://nixtla.io/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green)](LICENSE)

## 🌟 Overview

Professional time series forecasting analysis using Nixtla's TimeGPT ecosystem. This project demonstrates advanced forecasting techniques with comprehensive model comparison, hyperparameter optimization, and ensemble methods.

## ✨ Key Features

### 🔬 Advanced Analysis Pipeline
- **Complete ML Pipeline**: Data loading, preprocessing, training, evaluation
- **Multiple Datasets**: Real financial data (AAPL) and synthetic datasets
- **15+ Models**: StatsForecast, NeuralForecast, and TimeGPT integration
- **Hyperparameter Optimization**: Optuna-based automated tuning
- **Ensemble Methods**: Model combination and stacking

### 📊 Comprehensive Evaluation
- **Cross-validation**: Time series specific validation
- **Multiple Metrics**: MAE, RMSE, MAPE, SMAPE
- **Interactive Visualizations**: Plotly-based dashboards
- **Professional Reports**: Markdown and CSV outputs

## 🛠️ Installation & Usage

### Prerequisites
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Run Analysis
```bash
python timegpt_analysis.py
```

### Generated Outputs
- `eda_dashboard.html` - Exploratory Data Analysis
- `predictions_dashboard.html` - Forecast Visualizations  
- `timegpt_analysis_report.md` - Comprehensive Report
- `model_performance.csv` - Detailed Metrics

## 📦 Core Dependencies

### Nixtla Ecosystem
- **nixtla**: TimeGPT API access
- **statsforecast**: Statistical models (ARIMA, ETS, Theta)
- **neuralforecast**: Deep learning models (N-BEATS, N-HiTS, TFT)

### Analysis & Optimization
- **optuna**: Hyperparameter optimization
- **plotly**: Interactive visualizations
- **yfinance**: Real financial data
- **scikit-learn**: ML utilities

## 📈 Models Implemented

### Statistical Models
- **AutoARIMA**: Automatic ARIMA selection
- **AutoETS**: Exponential smoothing
- **AutoCES**: Complex exponential smoothing
- **DynamicOptimizedTheta**: Advanced Theta method
- **SeasonalNaive**: Seasonal baseline

### Neural Models
- **N-BEATS**: Neural basis expansion
- **N-HiTS**: Hierarchical interpolation
- **TFT**: Temporal Fusion Transformer
- **TimesNet**: Advanced neural architecture

### Ensemble Methods
- **Simple Average**: Equal weight combination
- **Weighted Average**: Performance-based weighting
- **Regression Ensemble**: Meta-learning approach

## 🔧 Analysis Pipeline

### 1. Data Preparation
```python
# Load and prepare multiple datasets
analysis.load_and_prepare_data("AAPL", "5y")
analysis.exploratory_data_analysis()
```

### 2. Model Training
```python
# Train statistical and neural models
analysis.train_statsforecast_models()
analysis.train_neuralforecast_models()
```

### 3. Optimization
```python
# Hyperparameter tuning with Optuna
analysis.optimize_hyperparameters("NBEATS")
```

### 4. Evaluation
```python
# Comprehensive model evaluation
analysis.evaluate_models()
analysis.create_ensemble_predictions()
```

## 📊 Performance Results

### Model Comparison (AAPL Dataset)
| Model | MAE | RMSE | MAPE |
|-------|-----|------|------|
| AutoARIMA | 2.45 | 3.12 | 1.8% |
| N-BEATS | 2.31 | 2.98 | 1.6% |
| Ensemble | 2.18 | 2.85 | 1.5% |

### Key Insights
- **Neural models** outperform statistical on complex patterns
- **Ensemble methods** provide best overall performance
- **Hyperparameter optimization** improves accuracy by 15-20%

## 🎯 Business Applications

### Financial Forecasting
- Stock price prediction with uncertainty quantification
- Portfolio optimization and risk management
- Market trend analysis and regime detection

### Operational Planning
- Demand forecasting for inventory management
- Resource allocation and capacity planning
- Revenue and cost projection

## 🔬 Advanced Features

### Uncertainty Quantification
- Prediction intervals with configurable confidence levels
- Probabilistic forecasting with quantile regression
- Risk assessment and scenario analysis

### Model Interpretability
- Feature importance analysis
- Residual diagnostics and validation
- Forecast decomposition (trend, seasonality, noise)

### Scalability
- Batch processing for multiple time series
- Distributed computing support
- Memory-efficient data handling

## 📚 Technical Documentation

### Architecture
- **Modular Design**: Separate classes for each analysis component
- **Error Handling**: Robust exception management
- **Logging**: Comprehensive progress tracking
- **Reproducibility**: Fixed random seeds and versioning

### Performance Optimization
- **Parallel Processing**: Multi-core model training
- **Memory Management**: Efficient data structures
- **Caching**: Intermediate result storage
- **Early Stopping**: Prevent overfitting

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! Please read our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).

### Development Setup
```bash
git clone https://github.com/PabloPoletti/TimeGPT-Advanced-Forecasting.git
cd TimeGPT-Advanced-Forecasting
pip install -r requirements.txt
python timegpt_analysis.py
```

## 📄 License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👨‍💻 Author

**Pablo Poletti** - Economist & Data Scientist
- 🌐 GitHub: [@PabloPoletti](https://github.com/PabloPoletti)
- 📧 Email: lic.poletti@gmail.com
- 💼 LinkedIn: [Pablo Poletti](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pablom-poletti/)

## 🔗 Related Time Series Projects

- 🎯 [DARTS Unified Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/DARTS-Unified-Forecasting) - 20+ models with unified API
- 📈 [Prophet Business Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/Prophet-Business-Forecasting) - Business-focused analysis
- 🔬 [SKTime ML Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/SKTime-ML-Forecasting) - Scikit-learn compatible framework
- 🎯 [GluonTS Probabilistic Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/GluonTS-Probabilistic-Forecasting) - Uncertainty quantification
- ⚡ [PyTorch TFT Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/PyTorch-TFT-Forecasting) - Attention-based deep learning

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [Nixtla Team](https://nixtla.io/) for the TimeGPT ecosystem
- Open source time series community
- Contributors and users providing feedback

---

⭐ **Star this repository if you find it helpful for your time series projects!**

Commit message:

Update README - Emphasize required Nixtla libraries

README.md, after:

# 🚀 TimeGPT Advanced Forecasting Analysis

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.8%2B-blue)](https://www.python.org/)
[![TimeGPT](https://img.shields.io/badge/TimeGPT-Nixtla-green)](https://nixtla.io/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green)](LICENSE)

## 🌟 Overview

Professional time series forecasting analysis using Nixtla's TimeGPT ecosystem. This project demonstrates advanced forecasting techniques with comprehensive model comparison, hyperparameter optimization, and ensemble methods.

## ✨ Key Features

### 🔬 Advanced Analysis Pipeline
- **Complete ML Pipeline**: Data loading, preprocessing, training, evaluation
- **Multiple Datasets**: Real financial data (AAPL) and synthetic datasets
- **15+ Models**: StatsForecast, NeuralForecast, and TimeGPT integration
- **Hyperparameter Optimization**: Optuna-based automated tuning
- **Ensemble Methods**: Model combination and stacking

### 📊 Comprehensive Evaluation
- **Cross-validation**: Time series specific validation
- **Multiple Metrics**: MAE, RMSE, MAPE, SMAPE
- **Interactive Visualizations**: Plotly-based dashboards
- **Professional Reports**: Markdown and CSV outputs

## 🛠️ Installation & Usage

### ⚠️ Required Libraries
**This project specifically requires the Nixtla ecosystem to function properly:**

```bash
# Core Nixtla libraries - REQUIRED
pip install nixtla
pip install statsforecast
pip install neuralforecast

# Or install all requirements
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Note:** Without these libraries, the analysis cannot proceed. The project will exit with clear installation instructions if dependencies are missing.

### Run Analysis
```bash
python timegpt_analysis.py
```

### Generated Outputs
- `eda_dashboard.html` - Exploratory Data Analysis
- `predictions_dashboard.html` - Forecast Visualizations  
- `timegpt_analysis_report.md` - Comprehensive Report
- `model_performance.csv` - Detailed Metrics

## 📦 Core Dependencies

### Nixtla Ecosystem
- **nixtla**: TimeGPT API access
- **statsforecast**: Statistical models (ARIMA, ETS, Theta)
- **neuralforecast**: Deep learning models (N-BEATS, N-HiTS, TFT)

### Analysis & Optimization
- **optuna**: Hyperparameter optimization
- **plotly**: Interactive visualizations
- **yfinance**: Real financial data
- **scikit-learn**: ML utilities

## 📈 Models Implemented

### Statistical Models
- **AutoARIMA**: Automatic ARIMA selection
- **AutoETS**: Exponential smoothing
- **AutoCES**: Complex exponential smoothing
- **DynamicOptimizedTheta**: Advanced Theta method
- **SeasonalNaive**: Seasonal baseline

### Neural Models
- **N-BEATS**: Neural basis expansion
- **N-HiTS**: Hierarchical interpolation
- **TFT**: Temporal Fusion Transformer
- **TimesNet**: Advanced neural architecture

### Ensemble Methods
- **Simple Average**: Equal weight combination
- **Weighted Average**: Performance-based weighting
- **Regression Ensemble**: Meta-learning approach

## 🔧 Analysis Pipeline

### 1. Data Preparation
```python
# Load and prepare multiple datasets
analysis.load_and_prepare_data("AAPL", "5y")
analysis.exploratory_data_analysis()
```

### 2. Model Training
```python
# Train statistical and neural models
analysis.train_statsforecast_models()
analysis.train_neuralforecast_models()
```

### 3. Optimization
```python
# Hyperparameter tuning with Optuna
analysis.optimize_hyperparameters("NBEATS")
```

### 4. Evaluation
```python
# Comprehensive model evaluation
analysis.evaluate_models()
analysis.create_ensemble_predictions()
```

## 📊 Performance Results

### Model Comparison (AAPL Dataset)
| Model | MAE | RMSE | MAPE |
|-------|-----|------|------|
| AutoARIMA | 2.45 | 3.12 | 1.8% |
| N-BEATS | 2.31 | 2.98 | 1.6% |
| Ensemble | 2.18 | 2.85 | 1.5% |

### Key Insights
- **Neural models** outperform statistical on complex patterns
- **Ensemble methods** provide best overall performance
- **Hyperparameter optimization** improves accuracy by 15-20%

## 🎯 Business Applications

### Financial Forecasting
- Stock price prediction with uncertainty quantification
- Portfolio optimization and risk management
- Market trend analysis and regime detection

### Operational Planning
- Demand forecasting for inventory management
- Resource allocation and capacity planning
- Revenue and cost projection

## 🔬 Advanced Features

### Uncertainty Quantification
- Prediction intervals with configurable confidence levels
- Probabilistic forecasting with quantile regression
- Risk assessment and scenario analysis

### Model Interpretability
- Feature importance analysis
- Residual diagnostics and validation
- Forecast decomposition (trend, seasonality, noise)

### Scalability
- Batch processing for multiple time series
- Distributed computing support
- Memory-efficient data handling

## 📚 Technical Documentation

### Architecture
- **Modular Design**: Separate classes for each analysis component
- **Error Handling**: Robust exception management
- **Logging**: Comprehensive progress tracking
- **Reproducibility**: Fixed random seeds and versioning

### Performance Optimization
- **Parallel Processing**: Multi-core model training
- **Memory Management**: Efficient data structures
- **Caching**: Intermediate result storage
- **Early Stopping**: Prevent overfitting

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! Please read our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).

### Development Setup
```bash
git clone https://github.com/PabloPoletti/TimeGPT-Advanced-Forecasting.git
cd TimeGPT-Advanced-Forecasting
pip install -r requirements.txt
python timegpt_analysis.py
```

## 📄 License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👨‍💻 Author

**Pablo Poletti** - Economist & Data Scientist
- 🌐 GitHub: [@PabloPoletti](https://github.com/PabloPoletti)
- 📧 Email: lic.poletti@gmail.com
- 💼 LinkedIn: [Pablo Poletti](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pablom-poletti/)

## 🔗 Related Time Series Projects

- 🎯 [DARTS Unified Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/DARTS-Unified-Forecasting) - 20+ models with unified API
- 📈 [Prophet Business Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/Prophet-Business-Forecasting) - Business-focused analysis
- 🔬 [SKTime ML Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/SKTime-ML-Forecasting) - Scikit-learn compatible framework
- 🎯 [GluonTS Probabilistic Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/GluonTS-Probabilistic-Forecasting) - Uncertainty quantification
- ⚡ [PyTorch TFT Forecasting](https://github.com/PabloPoletti/PyTorch-TFT-Forecasting) - Attention-based deep learning

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- [Nixtla Team](https://nixtla.io/) for the TimeGPT ecosystem
- Open source time series community
- Contributors and users providing feedback

---

⭐ **Star this repository if you find it helpful for your time series projects!**
